README.md, before:

Akka [![Latest version](https://index.scala-lang.org/akka/akka/akka-actor/latest.svg)](https://index.scala-lang.org/akka/akka/akka-actor)
====

We believe that writing correct concurrent & distributed, resilient and elastic applications is too hard.
Most of the time it's because we are using the wrong tools and the wrong level of abstraction.

Akka is here to change that.

Using the Actor Model we raise the abstraction level and provide a better platform to build correct concurrent and scalable applications. This model is a perfect match for the principles laid out in the [Reactive Manifesto](https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/).

For resilience, we adopt the "Let it crash" model which the telecom industry has used with great success to build applications that self-heal and systems that never stop.

Actors also provide the abstraction for transparent distribution and the basis for truly scalable and fault-tolerant applications.

Learn more at [akka.io](https://akka.io/).

Reference Documentation
-----------------------

The reference documentation is available at [doc.akka.io](https://doc.akka.io),
for [Scala](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/scala.html) and [Java](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/java.html).

Community
---------
You can join these groups and chats to discuss and ask Akka related questions:

- Forums: [discuss.akka.io](https://discuss.akka.io)
- Issue tracker: [![github: akka/akka](https://img.shields.io/badge/github%3A-issues-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/akka/akka/issues)

In addition to that, you may enjoy following:

- The [news](https://akka.io/blog/news-archive.html) section of the page, which is updated whenever a new version is released
- The [Akka Team Blog](https://akka.io/blog/article-archive.html)
- The [Akka articles in the Lightbend Blog](https://www.lightbend.com/blog/akka)
- [@akkateam](https://twitter.com/akkateam) on Twitter
- Questions tagged [#akka on StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/akka)

Contributing
------------
**Contributions are *very* welcome!**

If you see an issue that you'd like to see fixed, or want to shape out some ideas,
the best way to make it happen is to help out by submitting a pull request implementing it.
We welcome contributions from all, even you are not yet familiar with this project,
We are happy to get you started, and will guide you through the process once you've submitted your PR.

Refer to the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/akka/akka/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) file for more details about the workflow,
and general hints on how to prepare your pull request. You can also ask for clarifications or guidance in GitHub issues directly,
or in the akka/dev chat if a more real time communication would be of benefit.

License
-------

Akka is licensed under the Business Source License 1.1, see LICENSE.

Commit message:

chore: point to current versions in the Readme

README.md, after:

Akka
====

We believe that writing correct concurrent & distributed, resilient and elastic applications is too hard.
Most of the time it's because we are using the wrong tools and the wrong level of abstraction.

Akka is here to change that.

Using the Actor Model we raise the abstraction level and provide a better platform to build correct concurrent and scalable applications. This model is a perfect match for the principles laid out in the [Reactive Manifesto](https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/).

For resilience, we adopt the "Let it crash" model which the telecom industry has used with great success to build applications that self-heal and systems that never stop.

Actors also provide the abstraction for transparent distribution and the basis for truly scalable and fault-tolerant applications.

Learn more at [akka.io](https://akka.io/).

Reference Documentation
-----------------------

The reference documentation is available at [doc.akka.io](https://doc.akka.io),
for [Scala](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/scala.html) and [Java](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/java.html).

Current versions of all Akka libraries
--------------------------------------

The current versions of all Akka libraries are listed on the [Akka Dependencies](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-dependencies/current/) page. Releases of the Akka core libraries in this repository are listed on the [GitHub releases](https://github.com/akka/akka/releases) page.

Community
---------
You can join these groups and chats to discuss and ask Akka related questions:

- Forums: [discuss.akka.io](https://discuss.akka.io)
- Issue tracker: [![github: akka/akka](https://img.shields.io/badge/github%3A-issues-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/akka/akka/issues)

In addition to that, you may enjoy following:

- The [news](https://akka.io/blog/news-archive.html) section of the page, which is updated whenever a new version is released
- The [Akka Team Blog](https://akka.io/blog/article-archive.html)
- The [Akka articles in the Lightbend Blog](https://www.lightbend.com/blog/akka)
- [@akkateam](https://twitter.com/akkateam) on Twitter
- Questions tagged [#akka on StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/akka)

Contributing
------------
**Contributions are *very* welcome!**

If you see an issue that you'd like to see fixed, or want to shape out some ideas,
the best way to make it happen is to help out by submitting a pull request implementing it.
We welcome contributions from all, even you are not yet familiar with this project,
We are happy to get you started, and will guide you through the process once you've submitted your PR.

Refer to the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/akka/akka/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) file for more details about the workflow,
and general hints on how to prepare your pull request. You can also ask for clarifications or guidance in GitHub issues directly,
or in the akka/dev chat if a more real time communication would be of benefit.

License
-------

Akka is licensed under the Business Source License 1.1, see [LICENSE](./LICENSE).
