akka-docs/project/migration-guide-2.0.x-2.1.x.rst, before:

.. _migration-2.1:

################################
 Migration Guide 2.0.x to 2.1.x
################################

The 2.1 release contains several structural changes that require some
simple, mechanical source-level changes in client code. Several things have
been moved to Scala standard library, such as ``Future``.

When migrating from 1.3.x to 2.1.x you should first follow the instructions for
migrating `1.3.x to 2.0.x <http://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.0.3/project/migration-guide-1.3.x-2.0.x.html>`_.

Scala Version
=============

Change your project build and dependencies to Scala version:

.. parsed-literal::

  |scalaVersion|

Config Dependency
=================

`Typesafe config <https://github.com/typesafehub/config>`_ library is a normal 
dependency of akka-actor and it is no longer embedded in ``akka-actor.jar``. 
If your are using a build tool with dependency resolution, such as sbt or maven you 
will not notice the difference, but if you have manually constructed classpaths 
you need to add `config-0.5.0.jar <http://mirrors.ibiblio.org/maven2/com/typesafe/config/0.5.0/>`_.

Pieces Moved to Scala Standard Library
======================================

Change the following import statements.

==================================== ====================================
Search                               Replace with
==================================== ====================================
``akka.dispatch.Await``              ``scala.concurrent.Await``
``akka.dispatch.Future``             ``scala.concurrent.Future``
``akka.dispatch.Promise``            ``scala.concurrent.Promise``
``akka.dispatch.ExecutionContext``   ``scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext``
``akka.util.Duration``               ``scala.concurrent.util.Duration``
``akka.util.duration``               ``scala.concurrent.util.duration``
``akka.util.Deadline``               ``scala.concurrent.util.Deadline``
``akka.util.NonFatal``               ``scala.util.control.NonFatal``
``akka.japi.Util.manifest``          ``akka.japi.Util.classTag``
==================================== ====================================

Scheduler Dispatcher
====================

The ``ExecutionContext`` to use for running scheduled tasks must be specified.

Scala:

::
  
  import context.dispatcher // Use this Actors' Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  context.system.scheduler.scheduleOnce(10 seconds, self, Reconnect)

  import system.dispatcher // Use ActorSystem's default Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  system.scheduler.scheduleOnce(50 milliseconds) {
    testActor ! System.currentTimeMillis
  }

Java:
::
  
  // Use this Actors' Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  getContext().system().scheduler().scheduleOnce(Duration.parse("10 seconds", getSelf(), 
    new Reconnect(), getContext().getDispatcher());

  // Use ActorSystem's default Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  system.scheduler().scheduleOnce(Duration.create(50, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS), new Runnable() {
      @Override
      public void run() {
        testActor.tell(System.currentTimeMillis());
      }
    }, system.dispatcher());


API Changes of Future - Scala
=============================

v2.0::

  def square(i: Int): Future[Int] = Promise successful i * i

v2.1::

  def square(i: Int): Future[Int] = Future successful i * i

v2.0::

  val failedFilter = future1.filter(_ % 2 == 1).recover {
    case m: MatchError => //When filter fails, it will have a MatchError
  }

v2.1::

  val failedFilter = future1.filter(_ % 2 == 1).recover {
    case m: NoSuchElementException => //When filter fails, it will have a java.util.NoSuchElementException
  }



API Changes of Future - Java
============================

v2.0::

      ExecutorService yourExecutorServiceGoesHere = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
      ExecutionContextExecutorService ec =
        ExecutionContexts.fromExecutorService(yourExecutorServiceGoesHere);

      //Use ec with your Futures
      Future<String> f1 = Futures.successful("foo", ec);

      // Then you shut the ec down somewhere at the end of your program/application.
      ec.shutdown();

v2.1::

      ExecutorService yourExecutorServiceGoesHere = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
      ExecutionContext ec =
        ExecutionContexts.fromExecutorService(yourExecutorServiceGoesHere);

      //No need to pass the ExecutionContext here
      Future<String> f1 = Futures.successful("foo");

      // Then you shut the ExecutorService down somewhere at the end of your program/application.
      yourExecutorServiceGoesHere.shutdown();

v2.0::

    Future<String> f1 = future(new Callable<String>() {
      public String call() {
        return "Hello" + "World";
      }
    }, system.dispatcher());

v2.1::

    final ExecutionContext ec = system.dispatcher();

    Future<String> f1 = future(new Callable<String>() {
      public String call() {
        return "Hello" + "World";
      }
    }, ec);

v2.0::

    Future<String> future1 = Futures.successful("value", system.dispatcher()).andThen(
      new OnComplete<String>() {
        public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
          if (failure != null)
              sendToIssueTracker(failure);
        }
    }).andThen(new OnComplete<String>() {
      public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
        if (result != null)
          sendToTheInternetz(result);
      }
    });              

v2.1::

    final ExecutionContext ec = system.dispatcher();
    Future<String> future1 = Futures.successful("value").andThen(new OnComplete<String>() {
        public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
            if (failure != null)
                sendToIssueTracker(failure);
        }
    }, ec).andThen(new OnComplete<String>() {
      public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
        if (result != null)
          sendToTheInternetz(result);
      }
    }, ec);

Empty Props
===========

v2.0 Scala::

  val router2 = system.actorOf(Props().withRouter(
    RoundRobinRouter(routees = routees)))

v2.1 Scala::

  val router2 = system.actorOf(Props[ExampleActor1].withRouter(
    RoundRobinRouter(routees = routees)))    

v2.0 Java::

  ActorRef router2 = system.actorOf(new Props(ExampleActor.class).withRouter(
    RoundRobinRouter.create(routees)));

v2.1 Java::

  ActorRef router2 = system.actorOf(new Props().withRouter(RoundRobinRouter.create(routees)));

Props: Function-based creation
==============================

v2.0 Scala::

  Props(context => { case someMessage => context.sender ! someMessage })

v2.1 Scala::

  Props(new Actor { def receive = { case someMessage => sender ! someMessage } })

Failing Send
============

When failing to send to a remote actor or actor with bounded or durable mailbox the message will 
silently be delivered to ``ActorSystem.deadletters`` instead of throwing an exception.

Graceful Stop Exception
=======================

If the target actor of ``akka.pattern.gracefulStop`` isn't terminated within the 
timeout the ``Future`` is completed with failure ``akka.pattern.AskTimeoutException``.
In 2.0 it was ``akka.actor.ActorTimeoutException``.

getInstance for singeltons - Java
====================================

v2.0::

  import static akka.actor.Actors.*;

  if (msg.equals("done")) {
    myActor.tell(poisonPill());
  } else if (msg == Actors.receiveTimeout()) {

v2.1::

  import akka.actor.PoisonPill;      
  import akka.actor.ReceiveTimeout;

  if (msg.equals("done")) {
    myActor.tell(PoisonPill.getInstance());
  } else if (msg == ReceiveTimeout.getInstance()) {


Testkit Probe Reply
===================

v2.0::

  probe.sender ! "world"

v2.1::

  probe.reply("world")  

log-remote-lifecycle-events
===========================

Default value of akka.remote.log-remote-lifecycle-events has changed to **on**.
If you don't want these in the log you need to add this to your configuration::

  akka.remote.log-remote-lifecycle-events = off

Stash postStop
==============

Both Actors and UntypedActors using ``Stash`` now overrides postStop to make sure that
stashed messages are put into the dead letters when the actor stops, make sure you call
super.postStop if you override it.

Commit message:

Adding migration docs for the Either => Try changes as well as cleaning up a couple of imports

akka-docs/project/migration-guide-2.0.x-2.1.x.rst, after:

.. _migration-2.1:

################################
 Migration Guide 2.0.x to 2.1.x
################################

The 2.1 release contains several structural changes that require some
simple, mechanical source-level changes in client code. Several things have
been moved to Scala standard library, such as ``Future``.

When migrating from 1.3.x to 2.1.x you should first follow the instructions for
migrating `1.3.x to 2.0.x <http://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.0.3/project/migration-guide-1.3.x-2.0.x.html>`_.

Scala Version
=============

Change your project build and dependencies to Scala version:

.. parsed-literal::

  |scalaVersion|

Config Dependency
=================

`Typesafe config <https://github.com/typesafehub/config>`_ library is a normal 
dependency of akka-actor and it is no longer embedded in ``akka-actor.jar``. 
If your are using a build tool with dependency resolution, such as sbt or maven you 
will not notice the difference, but if you have manually constructed classpaths 
you need to add `config-0.5.0.jar <http://mirrors.ibiblio.org/maven2/com/typesafe/config/0.5.0/>`_.

Pieces Moved to Scala Standard Library
======================================

Change the following import statements.

==================================== ====================================
Search                               Replace with
==================================== ====================================
``akka.dispatch.Await``              ``scala.concurrent.Await``
``akka.dispatch.Future``             ``scala.concurrent.Future``
``akka.dispatch.Promise``            ``scala.concurrent.Promise``
``akka.dispatch.ExecutionContext``   ``scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext``
``akka.util.Duration``               ``scala.concurrent.util.Duration``
``akka.util.duration``               ``scala.concurrent.util.duration``
``akka.util.Deadline``               ``scala.concurrent.util.Deadline``
``akka.util.NonFatal``               ``scala.util.control.NonFatal``
``akka.japi.Util.manifest``          ``akka.japi.Util.classTag``
==================================== ====================================

Scheduler Dispatcher
====================

The ``ExecutionContext`` to use for running scheduled tasks must be specified.

Scala:

::
  
  import context.dispatcher // Use this Actors' Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  context.system.scheduler.scheduleOnce(10 seconds, self, Reconnect)

  import system.dispatcher // Use ActorSystem's default Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  system.scheduler.scheduleOnce(50 milliseconds) {
    testActor ! System.currentTimeMillis
  }

Java:
::
  
  // Use this Actors' Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  getContext().system().scheduler().scheduleOnce(Duration.parse("10 seconds", getSelf(), 
    new Reconnect(), getContext().getDispatcher());

  // Use ActorSystem's default Dispatcher as ExecutionContext
  system.scheduler().scheduleOnce(Duration.create(50, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS), new Runnable() {
      @Override
      public void run() {
        testActor.tell(System.currentTimeMillis());
      }
    }, system.dispatcher());


API Changes of Future - Scala
=============================

v2.0::

  def square(i: Int): Future[Int] = Promise successful i * i

v2.1::

  def square(i: Int): Future[Int] = Future successful i * i

v2.0::

  val failedFilter = future1.filter(_ % 2 == 1).recover {
    case m: MatchError => //When filter fails, it will have a MatchError
  }

v2.1::

  val failedFilter = future1.filter(_ % 2 == 1).recover {
    case m: NoSuchElementException => //When filter fails, it will have a java.util.NoSuchElementException
  }



API Changes of Future - Java
============================

v2.0::

      ExecutorService yourExecutorServiceGoesHere = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
      ExecutionContextExecutorService ec =
        ExecutionContexts.fromExecutorService(yourExecutorServiceGoesHere);

      //Use ec with your Futures
      Future<String> f1 = Futures.successful("foo", ec);

      // Then you shut the ec down somewhere at the end of your program/application.
      ec.shutdown();

v2.1::

      ExecutorService yourExecutorServiceGoesHere = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
      ExecutionContext ec =
        ExecutionContexts.fromExecutorService(yourExecutorServiceGoesHere);

      //No need to pass the ExecutionContext here
      Future<String> f1 = Futures.successful("foo");

      // Then you shut the ExecutorService down somewhere at the end of your program/application.
      yourExecutorServiceGoesHere.shutdown();

v2.0::

    Future<String> f1 = future(new Callable<String>() {
      public String call() {
        return "Hello" + "World";
      }
    }, system.dispatcher());

v2.1::

    final ExecutionContext ec = system.dispatcher();

    Future<String> f1 = future(new Callable<String>() {
      public String call() {
        return "Hello" + "World";
      }
    }, ec);

v2.0::

    Future<String> future1 = Futures.successful("value", system.dispatcher()).andThen(
      new OnComplete<String>() {
        public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
          if (failure != null)
              sendToIssueTracker(failure);
        }
    }).andThen(new OnComplete<String>() {
      public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
        if (result != null)
          sendToTheInternetz(result);
      }
    });              

v2.1::

    final ExecutionContext ec = system.dispatcher();
    Future<String> future1 = Futures.successful("value").andThen(new OnComplete<String>() {
        public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
            if (failure != null)
                sendToIssueTracker(failure);
        }
    }, ec).andThen(new OnComplete<String>() {
      public void onComplete(Throwable failure, String result) {
        if (result != null)
          sendToTheInternetz(result);
      }
    }, ec);

API changes of DynamicAccess
============================

All methods with scala.Either[Throwable, X] have been changed to used scala.util.Try[X].

DynamicAccess.withErrorHandling has been removed since scala.util.Try now fulfills that role.

API changes of Serialization
============================

All methods with scala.Either[Throwable, X] have been changed to used scala.util.Try[X].

Empty Props
===========

v2.0 Scala::

  val router2 = system.actorOf(Props().withRouter(
    RoundRobinRouter(routees = routees)))

v2.1 Scala::

  val router2 = system.actorOf(Props[ExampleActor1].withRouter(
    RoundRobinRouter(routees = routees)))    

v2.0 Java::

  ActorRef router2 = system.actorOf(new Props(ExampleActor.class).withRouter(
    RoundRobinRouter.create(routees)));

v2.1 Java::

  ActorRef router2 = system.actorOf(new Props().withRouter(RoundRobinRouter.create(routees)));

Props: Function-based creation
==============================

v2.0 Scala::

  Props(context => { case someMessage => context.sender ! someMessage })

v2.1 Scala::

  Props(new Actor { def receive = { case someMessage => sender ! someMessage } })

Failing Send
============

When failing to send to a remote actor or actor with bounded or durable mailbox the message will 
silently be delivered to ``ActorSystem.deadletters`` instead of throwing an exception.

Graceful Stop Exception
=======================

If the target actor of ``akka.pattern.gracefulStop`` isn't terminated within the 
timeout the ``Future`` is completed with failure ``akka.pattern.AskTimeoutException``.
In 2.0 it was ``akka.actor.ActorTimeoutException``.

getInstance for singeltons - Java
====================================

v2.0::

  import static akka.actor.Actors.*;

  if (msg.equals("done")) {
    myActor.tell(poisonPill());
  } else if (msg == Actors.receiveTimeout()) {

v2.1::

  import akka.actor.PoisonPill;      
  import akka.actor.ReceiveTimeout;

  if (msg.equals("done")) {
    myActor.tell(PoisonPill.getInstance());
  } else if (msg == ReceiveTimeout.getInstance()) {


Testkit Probe Reply
===================

v2.0::

  probe.sender ! "world"

v2.1::

  probe.reply("world")  

log-remote-lifecycle-events
===========================

Default value of akka.remote.log-remote-lifecycle-events has changed to **on**.
If you don't want these in the log you need to add this to your configuration::

  akka.remote.log-remote-lifecycle-events = off

Stash postStop
==============

Both Actors and UntypedActors using ``Stash`` now overrides postStop to make sure that
stashed messages are put into the dead letters when the actor stops, make sure you call
super.postStop if you override it.
