akka-docs/src/main/paradox/typed/extending.md, before:

# Extending Akka

Akka extensions can be used for almost anything, they provide a way to create
an instance of a class only once for the whole ActorSystem and be able to access
it from anywhere. Akka features such as Cluster, Serialization and Sharding are all
Akka extensions. Below is the use-case of managing an expensive database connection 
pool and accessing it from various places in your application.

You can choose to have your Extension loaded on-demand or at `ActorSystem` creation 
time through the Akka configuration.
Details on how to make that happens are below, in the @ref:[Loading from Configuration](extending.md#loading) section.

@@@ warning

Since an extension is a way to hook into Akka itself, the implementor of the extension needs to
ensure the thread safety and that it is non-blocking.

@@@

## Building an extension

Let's build an extension to manage a shared database connection pool.

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #shared-resource }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #shared-resource }

First create an @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.Extension], this will be created only once per ActorSystem:

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #extension }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #extension }

This is the public API of your extension. Internally in this example we instantiate our expensive database connection. 

Then create an @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.ExtensionId] to identify the extension.
@scala[A good convention is to let the companion object of the `Extension` be the `ExtensionId`.]@java[A good convention is to define the `ExtensionId` as a static inner class of the `Extension`.]

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #extension-id }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #extension-id }

Then finally to use the extension it can be looked up:

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #usage }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #usage  }

The `DatabaseConnectionPool` can be looked up in this way any number of times and it will return the same instance.

<a id="loading"></a>
## Loading from configuration

To be able to load extensions from your Akka configuration you must add FQCNs of implementations of the `ExtensionId`
in the `akka.actor.typed.extensions` section of the config you provide to your `ActorSystem`.

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #config }

Java
:   ```ruby
   akka.actor.typed {
     extensions = ["jdocs.akka.extensions.ExtensionDocTest$DatabaseConnectionPool$Id"]
   }
   ```

Commit message:

Clarify loading an extension through config (#31816)
* Update extending.md

Clarify loading an extension through config.

* Update akka-docs/src/main/paradox/typed/extending.md

Co-authored-by: Johan Andrén <johan@markatta.com>

akka-docs/src/main/paradox/typed/extending.md, after:

# Extending Akka

Akka extensions can be used for almost anything, they provide a way to create
an instance of a class only once for the whole ActorSystem and be able to access
it from anywhere. Akka features such as Cluster, Serialization and Sharding are all
Akka extensions. Below is the use-case of managing an expensive database connection 
pool and accessing it from various places in your application.

You can choose to have your Extension loaded on-demand or at `ActorSystem` creation 
time through the Akka configuration.
Details on how to make that happens are below, in the @ref:[Loading from Configuration](extending.md#loading) section.

@@@ warning

Since an extension is a way to hook into Akka itself, the implementor of the extension needs to
ensure the thread safety and that it is non-blocking.

@@@

## Building an extension

Let's build an extension to manage a shared database connection pool.

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #shared-resource }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #shared-resource }

First create an @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.Extension], this will be created only once per ActorSystem:

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #extension }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #extension }

This is the public API of your extension. Internally in this example we instantiate our expensive database connection. 

Then create an @apidoc[akka.actor.typed.ExtensionId] to identify the extension.
@scala[A good convention is to let the companion object of the `Extension` be the `ExtensionId`.]@java[A good convention is to define the `ExtensionId` as a static inner class of the `Extension`.]

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #extension-id }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #extension-id }

Then finally to use the extension it can be looked up:

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #usage }

Java
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocTest.java](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocTest.java) { #usage  }

The `DatabaseConnectionPool` can be looked up in this way any number of times and it will return the same instance.

<a id="loading"></a>
## Loading from configuration

Loading an extension from configuration is optional. It is an optimization and can be used to eagerly load the extension when the ActorSystem is started. If not done from configuration, the extension is instantiated and registered the first time it is accessed.

To be able to load extensions from your Akka configuration you must add FQCNs of implementations of the `ExtensionId`
in the `akka.actor.typed.extensions` section of the config you provide to your `ActorSystem`.

Scala
:  @@snip [ExtensionDocSpec.scala](/akka-actor-typed-tests/src/test/scala/docs/akka/typed/extensions/ExtensionDocSpec.scala) { #config }

Java
:   ```ruby
   akka.actor.typed {
     extensions = ["jdocs.akka.extensions.ExtensionDocTest$DatabaseConnectionPool$Id"]
   }
   ```
