akka-docs/src/main/paradox/typed/persistence-style.md, before:

# Style Guide 

## Event handlers in the state

The section about @ref:[Changing Behavior](persistence.md#changing-behavior) described how commands and events
can be handled differently depending on the state. One can take that one step further and define the event
handler inside the state classes. @scala[In @ref:[the next section](#command-handlers-in-the-state)
the command handlers are also defined in the state.]

The state can be seen as your domain object and it should contain the core business logic. Then it's a matter
of taste if event handlers and command handlers should be defined in the state or be kept outside of it.

Here we are using a bank account as the example domain. It has 3 state classes that are representing the lifecycle
of the account; `EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.

Scala
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.scala](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.scala) { #account-entity }

Java
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.java](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.java) { #account-entity }

@scala[Notice how the `eventHandler` delegates to the `applyEvent` in the `Account` (state), which is implemented
in the concrete `EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.]
@java[Notice how the `eventHandler` delegates to methods in the concrete `Account` (state) classes;
`EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.]

@@@ div { .group-scala }
## Command handlers in the state

We can take the previous bank account example one step further by handling the commands in the state too.

Scala
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithCommandHandlersInState.scala](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithCommandHandlersInState.scala) { #account-entity }

Notice how the command handler is delegating to `applyCommand` in the `Account` (state), which is implemented
in the concrete `EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.

@@@

## Optional initial state

Sometimes it's not desirable to use a separate state class for the empty initial state, but rather treat that as
there is no state yet.
@java[`null` can then be used as the `emptyState`, but be aware of that the `state` parameter
will then be `null` for the first commands and events until the first event has be persisted to create the
non-null state. It's possible to use `Optional` instead of `null` but that results in rather much boilerplate
to unwrap the `Optional` state parameter and therefore `null` is probably preferred. The following example
illustrates using `null` as the `emptyState`.]
@scala[`Option[State]` can be used as the state type and `None` as the `emptyState`. Pattern matching
is then used in command and event handlers at the outer layer before delegating to the state or other methods.]

Scala
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithOptionState.scala](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithOptionState.scala) { #account-entity }

Java
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithNullState.java](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithNullState.java) { #account-entity }

@@@ div { .group-java }
## Mutable state

The state can be mutable or immutable. When it is immutable the event handler returns a new instance of the state
for each change.

When using mutable state it's important to not send the full state instance as a message to another actor,
e.g. as a reply to a command. Messages must be immutable to avoid concurrency problems.

The above examples are using immutable state classes and below is corresponding example with mutable state.

Java
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithNullState.java](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithMutableState.java) { #account-entity }

@@@

Commit message:

feat: JDK 17+ persistence APIs (#32420)
* event sourced, replicated, durable state
* Docs, now in style guide sections
* Add WithReply versions of all APIs

akka-docs/src/main/paradox/typed/persistence-style.md, after:

# Style Guide 

## Event handlers in the state

The section about @ref:[Changing Behavior](persistence.md#changing-behavior) described how commands and events
can be handled differently depending on the state. One can take that one step further and define the event
handler inside the state classes. @scala[In @ref:[the next section](#command-handlers-in-the-state)
the command handlers are also defined in the state.]

The state can be seen as your domain object and it should contain the core business logic. Then it's a matter
of taste if event handlers and command handlers should be defined in the state or be kept outside of it.

Here we are using a bank account as the example domain. It has 3 state classes that are representing the lifecycle
of the account; `EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.

Scala
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.scala](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.scala) { #account-entity }

Java
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.java](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithEventHandlersInState.java) { #account-entity }

@scala[Notice how the `eventHandler` delegates to the `applyEvent` in the `Account` (state), which is implemented
in the concrete `EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.]
@java[Notice how the `eventHandler` delegates to methods in the concrete `Account` (state) classes;
`EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.]

@@@ div { .group-scala }
## Command handlers in the state

We can take the previous bank account example one step further by handling the commands in the state too.

Scala
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithCommandHandlersInState.scala](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithCommandHandlersInState.scala) { #account-entity }

Notice how the command handler is delegating to `applyCommand` in the `Account` (state), which is implemented
in the concrete `EmptyAccount`, `OpenedAccount`, and `ClosedAccount`.

@@@

## Optional initial state

Sometimes it's not desirable to use a separate state class for the empty initial state, but rather treat that as
there is no state yet.
@java[`null` can then be used as the `emptyState`, but be aware of that the `state` parameter
will then be `null` for the first commands and events until the first event has be persisted to create the
non-null state. It's possible to use `Optional` instead of `null` but that results in rather much boilerplate
to unwrap the `Optional` state parameter and therefore `null` is probably preferred. The following example
illustrates using `null` as the `emptyState`.]
@scala[`Option[State]` can be used as the state type and `None` as the `emptyState`. Pattern matching
is then used in command and event handlers at the outer layer before delegating to the state or other methods.]

Scala
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithOptionState.scala](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/scala/docs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithOptionState.scala) { #account-entity }

Java
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithNullState.java](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithNullState.java) { #account-entity }

@@@ div { .group-java }
## Mutable state

The state can be mutable or immutable. When it is immutable the event handler returns a new instance of the state
for each change.

When using mutable state it's important to not send the full state instance as a message to another actor,
e.g. as a reply to a command. Messages must be immutable to avoid concurrency problems.

The above examples are using immutable state classes and below is corresponding example with mutable state.

Java
:  @@snip [AccountExampleWithNullState.java](/akka-cluster-sharding-typed/src/test/java/jdocs/akka/cluster/sharding/typed/AccountExampleWithMutableState.java) { #account-entity }

## Leveraging Java 21 features

When building event sourced entities in a project using Java 21 or newer, the @javadoc[EventSourcedOnCommandBehavior](akka.persistence.typed.javadsl.EventSourcedOnCommandBehavior) 
base class provides an API that let you leverage the switch pattern match feature. When combined with `sealed` command
and event top types this gives you a more direct handling of commands and events as well as a compile time completeness
check that you have handled all kinds of commands and events in your event sourced behavior handler methods:

Java
:  @@snip [AccountBehavior.java](/akka-persistence-typed-tests/src/test/java-21+/jdocs21/akka/persistence/typed/javadsl/AccountBehavior.java) { #account-behavior }

@@@
